When I was asked to discuss my experience as an engineer, actually in a political environment in Massachusetts as the director of transportation planning and development, which was what we call a political appointee. I was appointed by the governor. And this talk was given at Georgia tech many years ago. Because they had a series of people who had been. Who are engineers, but who had actually been in government. And there arent that many that have been in government, certainly not at high levels in the dot.

So my talk today is going to, as Todd said, its going to discuss my experiences as an engineer in a political environment. In terms of how it relates to policymaking. And how organizations and agencies actually operate.

And then give you some lessons Learned. I think no matter whether youre in transportation or not, I suspect that the fact that they are still going to be lessons that are going to be important for you.

Now, at the beginning, let me say that everything im going to talk about. Is my experience in Massachusetts. Which is obviously part of the United States. And so much of what im going to say really relates to what I would call the us context. But ive taught this class at 2 universities. And ive had Chinese, ive had French, ive had Germans, ive had English, ive had nigerians, ive had south Africans. And they all tend to find something in this lecture that relates to them. And so my context here is basically that, yes, im going to talk about the us. But organizations are organizations, and people are people. And people behave more or less the same within organizations. And organizations will have differences, obviously. Culture, history, the type of people who go into that organization, the governance of the organization is important, obviously. But I suspect that much of what I would say will be true. No matter what organization youre talking about. For example, I know ive been to China many times. I know ive heard from Chinese students in the class in China. My observation is that engineers and technical people. Can make their way very high up into the government. Thats that true in the United States, per se?

I mean, most of the secretaries of transportation. Or commissioners of transportation. Of our state departments of transportation. Are not engineers. They're political appointees appointed by the governor. Many of our cabinet secretaries up at the high level. In transportation and environmental Protection. Are not engineers. Theyre not technical people. That obviously think. Will be an important factor. In how agencies are run and operate. But thats just an example of how there is a difference between, in that particular case, the Chinese example and ourselves.

Let me just say a little bit about myself, who I was at the time I was appointed the director of transportation planning and development in Massachusetts. I had two hundred and fifty employees that reported directly to me. There were five thousand employees actually in the department of transportation. And we had a capital budget at the time of 1.5 billion dollars. Which isnt much by the way, in todays standards, where mega billion dollar budgets are usually part of transportation agencies. But in the time 1.5 billion was quite large.

I was number 2 or 3 in the hierarchy of 5000 employees, depending on how you counted. I was basically equivalent to the chief engineer. Thought that I reported to him. I did not.

I reported to the secretary. And so I guess I was number 2 or number 3, depending who you talk to. My specific responsibilities were for planning, transportation planning, although the bureau that I was responsible for expanded to include project development, IE, taking a project from initial concept all the way through environmental analysis, through preliminary engineering up until final engineering. I was also given traffic operations at the time, which was unusual for the director of planning to have traffic operations. So I was responsible for all the traffic, state traffic signals, payment markings, other signs in Massachusetts. And then I was also responsible for the research program for the agency.

Importantly, and heres one of the differences, I suspect, between ourselves and other countries. We, in many states have civil service rules and regulations, IE, theres a. Theres a governmental structure in place to say, here is how you get a position. You often have to have civil service exams and move up the hierarchy, et cetera. And in Massachusetts case, we also happen to have the engineers in the agency that were part of a union. And so there were union contract issues in terms of what we could or could not do. In terms of asking the employees to do something for the responsibility that I had. And in fact, in all those agencies, all those employees that I had, the 5000 people, there were only 7 non union management people, of which I was one. Everyone else was union.

And I'll come back to that with an example of what that meant to me as the responsible manager in the agency. I was a political appointee. And thats important, as youll hear in a minute or 2. That means that I was appointed by the governor. I was not appointed by the secretary or the commissioner or the legislature. The governor said, I want this person in that position. Its a limited time appointment. You basically serve at the pleasure of the governor. And you serve as long as the governor serves. If he or she wants to keep you in that position.

And the other aspect of this, which is important. Which again, ill talk a little bit more in detail later on. Is that although I was the director of transportation planning development from Massachusetts. I represented the state in Washington DC in a lot of transportation issues. I testified to congress. I represented Massachusetts in whats called the American association of state highway and transportation officials. Which is a very large organization of all the 50 state dots in the country. Ive participated in conferences on behalf of the state. Although I was stateoriented in terms of what I was supposed to be doing. I spent a large amount of my time doing things nationally on behalf of the state, which again, will come back a little bit later.

Those were the kind of the characteristics of my professional position. But who was. I was 30, one years old at the time. And although many of you in the room probably think thats old, I assure you at the time that was very young. And to some extent even today its still very young to have that level of a responsible position. The average age in the agency when I took my position was 58 years old, which at that time I thought was really old. Versus im no older than that. So I guess its not that old. But they were the generation that had built the interstate system. They were the ones that did the, in their minds, the real engineering. And here comes this 30, one year old kid who thinks he has a p h d. Who is a professor at mit. What does he know about anything? And so there was that kind of image of.

I was an outsider to the agency. I was a registered professional engineer, which is important in an engineering agency. But as the engineers often tell me. But youre in charge of planning. Engineers dont do planning. At least in their mind, that was the case. But as I said before, I took over project development, which was engineering. I took over traffic operations, which was engineering. So that philosophy kind of changed. But at the very beginning, because I was in charge of the planning bureau, I was considered to be, if you will, a 2nd class citizen.

If you can tell, I don't speak like Massachusetts people do. They have a very unique accent. I was originally from Wisconsin and moved to Massachusetts through Northwestern university and at mit, and lived in Massachusetts for about 15 years or so. And so I was not a native Massachusetts person. Another strike against me in the minds of some people. And I didnt have this funny accent that people talked up there. Park the car. They have those very fun things of fan things. However, I did have one thing going for me. And for those of you from China, you probably dont know this, but theres a lot of competition among sports teams in the United States. And in Boston, we have a baseball team called the red sox. And New York has a baseball team called the New York Yankees. They hate each other. Massachusetts people hate the Yankees. The New York people hate the red sox. And I hated the Yankees. Which actually made me popular among some of the people on my staff, because I was like them. I did not like the Yankees. So that was at least some redeeming factor.

Now, if you were to take everything that was stacked against me in terms of how young I was, in charge of planning, I was a political appointee, et cetera. And you had to guess at the beginning of my tenure as the director, is this guy going to survive? You would probably think that. No, he wasnt. He was not going to survive. Theres no way that he would be able to last in this agency. Well, I did. I lasted for 5 years, and then I voluntarily left to come to Georgia tech at the time. And I Learned a lot during those 5 years. And this is why im going to accompany to you in terms of lessons Learned. That again, I think in many cases, will be highly relevant to the organizations that youll eventually end up with. Even if you go into a university, there is the same observations.

1St, let tas say more. If any of you speak French, that means the state. I am the state. Louis the 14th, who was the then king of France. Many years ago, an ambassador went to the king and said, by king Louis, could you tell me what is. How is France governed? What is the governance of France? And he said, well, I am the state. I am the government. And the reason I say this, as my 1st observation, is that when I walked in the room, no matter where it was, if I was the highest ranking official there, if the government was there or the secretary was there, obviously they are in the state. But if im the highest ranking person, I am the state. So I was speaking for the state of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts at the time. It took me some time to understand that when I said something, people actually listened. Even though I was young, in other things, but. But people actually listened. So I had to be very careful in terms of what I said and how I said it. Especially in a public environment. When I was in front of cameras or in front of the newspaper reporters saying what it is that we were going to do, and why were going to do it. So this became a very important position and characteristic of what I was.

Now, that may be true. At the same time, I was a political appointee. And its not, in fact, a very strong position that youre in, especially if you come with all those marks against you that I mentioned earlier on. And I was very different from. I was 30. One. The average age was 58. I was a PhD. I think I was the only PhD in an agency of 5000 people. I was from Wisconsin. They were from primary investors. I was a different person. And the parenthetical statement there is, why is there a bottle of cheap apple wine on my desk? Is, one year after I took the position and became fairly successful at it, I came back to my office, and there was this very cheap bottle of apple wine on my desk. And I asked my assistant, I said, well, where did this wine come from? And she said, well, this and person, his name was chuck. He came in and put the bottle of wine on your desk and left. And I said, okay, so I called chuck into my office. I said, chuck, why did you bring me this bottle of apple wine? He said, well, a year ago, 4 or 5 of us took a bet that you would not survive a year. And I didnt think you were going to survive that. You had all these strikes against you. And I bet a bottle of apple wine that in fact you would not survive a year. And thats the bottle of apple wine that I now owe you. Because you survive more than a year. So I was. That was that 1st awakening that I had. That people were actually thinking that I was not going to be successful. And then I start thinking about what I would have done and what I was going to do. Become successful.

Now, apple wine was very cheap. I would have enjoyed a much better wine than that. But that was apparently what he got argued for. Beware the ides of March, ides of April, the ides of may, the ides of June. For those of you who know your history, Julius Caesar was assassinated on the ides of March. I think its March 17th or. And everybody was watching him as he entered into the Roman senate. Everybody was watching him while hes doing things. Well, everybody was watching me as well. And not just in March, but that every single month. People were watching me to see if I did something wrong. For example, when I showed up on the very 1st day of my job.

As Todd will tell you, people who have fairly high level positions in an agency like the department of transportation, you have parking spots assigned to you. So there was a parking spot assigned to the director of transportation planning development. That was my parking spot. And I have been told, no parking that spot when you come.

Well, it turns out that one week prior to my taking the job, showing up at the job, my grandfather died in Wisconsin. And I flew back for his funeral. And he had left me a car. A car that was in pretty good shape and was gone. Some license plates on it, of course. And so I drove the car back to Boston, and I kept the car. And thats the car that I drove on my very 1st day to my job. And I parked in the director spot. Literally within 20 minutes there was a state police officer in my office. He said, are you Michael Meyer? I said, yes. He said, do you have a car with Wisconsin license plates on it parked in the director spot? I said, yes. And he said, we do know that its against the law for a nonmassachusetts resident to hold a position like you have. Could you please show me your drivers license? Which I showed him, which of course was in Massachusetts.

Drivers license. He said, well, we had a report this morning that you were illegally hired by the governor because you really from Wisconsin. That message to me was, people were watching. I hadnt even been there 20 minutes, and somebody had already reported me on something they thought was illegal. So for a long time, people were watching what I was doing. Ill tell you about some battles, I thought, in a minute or so. But people were watching. They were waiting for me to make a mistake so that they could pounce. And this, to me, was an eye opener. It was something that. Because of the difference. Now, if you were one of the, what we would call good old boys at the time, I was 60 years old at the time. If I was an engineer, and I would have been right in, they would have done this. But because I was different, they acted differently as well. While I was a professor at mit, I taught this course there. A little bit different. And so I spent a fair amount of time talking about organization, behavior, organization, theory, even though I was an engineer. And so I came to the job at the dot from mit.

From the perspective of a lot of theory. Im not really worked in a transportation agency before. Ive worked in during the summer as a dot trainee, but it never had a position like I had an agency. And so I had in my mind a very traditional organizational hierarchy. Here's the top person. Here are the people that report to him. As I said, number 3. So I'm up there. So I went to the secretary of transportation and I said, ive got this great idea how we should reorganize the agency. Reorganize the department to become more efficient. And heres this concept of a hierarchy. And he said, Mike, let me show you something. He drew that red dot. He said, this is me. And he said, these are all the people that are important to me, and they all report to me. That is the organization chart for my agency. Which was completely a shock to me, because organization theory says there needs to be structure, there needs to be hard working, there needs to be standard operating procedures. And clearly this person wanted to have. He wanted to be the center of all the key, important decisions in which he had the right to be, because he was the head person. But this, by the way, you will not find this organization anywhere in the literature anywhere. But thats the way he wanted it.

And so my message to me, to myself at the time and to you, no matter what agency you're in, is figure out quickly who has the power and the authority. And those are got. Those 2 are different things by the way. You have the authority, but you may not have the power, but who has the power to really make decisions in your agency and find out what it is thats motivating him or her?

And I did, and again became fairly successful because of I knew who was going on. So the message to me was connect yourself to someone of authority, or at least assume it. For example, I was responsible for the reconstruction of a major freeway in Boston, one of the very 1st major freeways in the country to be reconstructed completely. And that governor, basically, yes, the secretary, who asked the commissioner, who asked me, you were to be responsible for making sure that this is not a disaster. And so I put together. I thought this was a great challenge and opportunity. My staff thought I was crazy. They thought this was going to be an utter disaster, and you're going to be blamed for it. Everyone is looking to blame somebody else.

But I put together a really good, what's called mitigation plan to make sure that people who use that corridor, that freeway corridor, were still able to get to and from Boston, even though we were constructing the project. And. But I was the center person for the authority, basically, and I had to work with the transit agency, with the state police, with the local police, with the city. The city is towns in the corridor. I work for the. I work with the fire department. I had to work with everybody. And so while we were putting together our plan, somebody came up with the idea that said that the transit authority should provide more frequent in the corridor so people could transfer it to transit. Somebody came up with the ideas that maybe the commuter rail in the corner should have additional cars on them. We would have to get them from someplace. It turns out we got them from Toronto. But somebody had that idea. The transfer authority came to me and they said, no, we don't agree with it. We don't approve of that. That's. We don't think. That's. We don't have the money for that. We're not gonna do it. Now, it turns out that the person I reported to, the secretary of transportation, was the chairman, by law, the chairman of the transit authority.

And so I said to the. I said I was thinking to the secretary this morning, and this is what he wants to do. Just like that, the area has disappeared. Weve got the commuter rail cars from Toronto. We had greater frequency on the transit lines. And so I assume.

I didnt talk to the secretary, I just. I knew what he would want to do. But I said that as soon as I connected myself to the number one authority, they basically gave up. Now, thats dangerous to do. Because after the fact, they make, as we say, call your bluff. Which is, we dont believe you were going to go talk to the secretary. Or were going to go talk to John or Mary or whatever. And see if you really have that authority. So its a somewhat dangerous strategy. But in my case, it worked very nicely. Because I knew what he would want. And so I basically thought I could comfortably speak on his behalf.

Find George. Now, I dont care what agency or organization youre in and what country. There is always a George. And let me explain to you that in fact, theres whole generations of students that have gone through my courses, who know what George is or georgette and could be a woman, is that person who, in fact, controls the money, controls the budget. And that person is an incredibly powerful person in an agency. The name of the person in my agency was George. And when I wanted to do something, money had to go through George. And I, for example, when I became the director, I said, I want to do something for the planning agency in Massachusetts. Why dont we buy the census data? Every 10 years, the census information comes out, and the planning agencies need to have that data to plan ahead for future infrastructure. I said, let us decide why we buy it for them, so they dont have to spend their money. And the planning people. But my staff said, oh thats a good idea. So I have set up a monthly progress meeting. Every month I meet with everybody at one time and say, okay, whats status? I said, what is the status of buying a census data? Well, George doesnt improve. And I said, who is George? Well, Georgie, I was in charge of. George is in charge of the budget. I said, well here's the organization chart from a pile the way down the bottom. Where is George with. George is down here in the middle of the agency. I said, but im up here. Im at the top. If I say we should do something, that should be done. And it turns out that George didn't approve. So month after month, well, George didn't approve. So when we don't, he won't give us the money.

So finally I went to the secretary and I said, Mr. Secretary, I asked you this before you gave me permission. Ive tried over several months to do it, and George. He knew. George was. George does not allow it. And I said, I cant do it. If I cant get George to agree to give me the money, whats the promise? I have no idea. And so he called the meeting with George and myself and himself. And George was the person who controlled the money, and he knew he had the power so that he could give money out any way he wanted to, on a discretionary basis. That gave him more power.

So the secretary turned to George and said, George, Mike wants to buy the data for the planning agencies. Why can't he do that? Well, George says, well, because someday, perhaps, maybe sometime in the future, somebody may need to have money. And I may. I have to have that money to give that person. And the secretary said, George, has anybody asked for that money? No. George, do you think anybody is likely to ask for that money in the next 2 years? No. And he said, give Mike the money and George. Okay. George reluctantly said, okay, fine.

Well, what was interesting is I went back to my staff after this meeting. Everybody in the department knew that George, myself and the secretary were meeting on this issue. I think the bets were about ninety nine percent that i would lose. Because george was all powerful. I was new. And I went back to my staff and they all came running in. If I know what happened.

I said, by the data. They said, what do you mean by the data? I said, George has approves. Oh, yes, he does. He now approves. And sure enough, the message went forth from George that in fact he would allow money now to be spent by the data.

I won a huge bet and it enhanced my position, if you will, at least among my staff. Ill tell you a bit about some other bells I had with George in the. By the way. George and I became good friends because apparently he respected people that could beat him at his own game. And so I became good friends with him after a while.

The Grapevine goes both ways again. Thats a term that we have rephrased, that we have. That talks about gossip is whats in the literature is called the informal communication path. You talk to somebody and then that person talks. Someone talks, and then suddenly it gets to someplace else. Probably a little bit different definition of what you started with. But I would hear from my staff all the time when George doesnt approve or. And doesnt like this or. So that was the great one coming to me.

Well, I Learned that I could send it the other way, too. And I would come in and my staff would say something. And of course they would blame George. I said, why, I can't believe it, George. I'm going to go to the secretary and I'm going to tell him. Of course I was serious. And within 10 minutes, I got a call from George. Because people immediately reported to him that I was upset with him. So I was able to send messages internal to an agency on issues that were of importance to the secretary, to myself, but without having to write a memo or just. We didn't have email back then. Or write a memo saying, here's what we should do. So the Grapevine, that informal decision process and communication process works both ways.

Very important, no matter what agency youre in, is get some early victories inside the agency. An established credit. That means credibility. Thats what we say. Credit is credibility. And of course, beating George was, in fact, one way of getting an early victory. In quotation marks within the agency.

That people then realized that I was someone to have to be. Had to be careful with. I beat George, and I beat George a couple times after that, and suddenly George became my best friend within the agency. So the fact that I was able to beat someone, or to get the secretary to agree with me, rather than George, what George was there for, had been there for 40 years. He knew everybody. As I said, he controlled the money. He was the most important power source in the entire agency, probably. And the fact that I was able to get the secretary to disagree with him and agree with me, really establish credibility for me within the agency.

The Meyer arbitration. This goes back to the union and also the idea of getting some early victories. The union had established via contract that in fact, when someone was to be promoted, that there were certain requirements for a promotion within the union. And in their minds, no matter what if youre qualified or not, if you were there longer, if your tenure was longer than anybody else, then you should get the position even though you weren't qualified for it.

Well, I was young and naive, and as I mentioned, I was responsible for environmental engineering. And I had 2 positions that were pretty high level environmental analysts. And the responsibilities were for people who could do environmental impact statements, who understood how to do air quality analysis, all the things that transportation agencies have to do. And I had 2 individuals on my staff who actually had masters degrees in environmental engineering and actually done. And they were part of the group that wanted to be promoted. And so I went through a process and basically promoted that.

But the process was interesting. I was. I tried to learn about the agency in the 1st several months. And I actually asked the secretary, could I sit in on a promotion decision in another part of the agency? Because I want to know how you go about doing this. And they said, fine. Well, it was unbelievable. I mean, they were taught, they. I didn't say anything, but there are like 3 or 4 top managers. And of course, whoever the top one was the most important person because he or she was going to make that final decision.

And I was shocked when I found out the discussion. So people would come in and interview, then after the fact they would say, well, I didnt like him because his relative did this to that person. I remember 20 years ago when he did this. It had nothing to do with the qualifications. It had to do with what their interpretation was in terms of how that person would fit in the agency.

Well, so I established a process of pirate are promoting, which is basically we were not allowed to talk to one another, because I didnt want the fact that I was the highest level person to influence their decision. I wanted to know what they really thought. I didn't want them to say, you're absolutely right. So we could not talk to one another. We had very set criteria, what we're looking for. And each of us then ranked, rated our each candidate on most criteria. And then at the end we just compare it. And it turned out in this particular case that the 2 environmental engineers and my staff, we all agree they were the best qualified. So I promoted them.

Well, next thing, the union argues that this was an infringement upon the contract, and therefore Meyer did something wrong. And they insisted that the person who had been there for 40 years had to get one of the jobs. Because he'd been there for 40 years, he knew nothing about the environment, knew nothing about the position. But hes been there the longest, and according to the union, he should get the job.

Well, when something like this happens, you go to whats called arbitration. Its not really a court as in a judicial court, but its kind of like a court. You have a person called the arbitrator who sits upfront. You have lawyers, you have people giving witnesses and everything else. And to make a long story short, we won the arbitration fighting. IE, I won the arbitration fighting because the arbitrator said that there is absolutely nothing in my process. That in any way bias, deflection against the person that the union wanted. It's just that he wasn't qualified. And there's nothing in the union contract that says you have to take the one whos been there the longest. And so thats now called. Thats still up there. And if you will, agency law, it's called the Meyer arbitration finding.

And so that to me, was another victory, if you will. Come within the agency. And it turns out that the union representative was in my bureau. I knew him quite well. And so I went to him afterwards and I said, well, I apologize and we had to come to this. I said, but I do think that the result was correct, so. Well, we didn't think we're gonna win it. He said, but we just want to send you a message that the union is important and powerful. And that you should be careful next time. And I looked at it and I said, bring it on. I said, im not going to do anything against someones doing something against the benefit of my agency. Just because the union thinks something else. Ive stopped. But thats not to go away. Its going to work. And they never challenged me in 5 years again. So I think they got my message, as much as they were trying to send me a message.

Also, get some early victories outside of your agency. And it depends on where you end up. You may not have a program of infrastructure investment. Where the case is. I don't know what it may be, but in my case, we were responsible for roads and transit in the entire state. And so not only was I fighting battles inside my agency to get credibility, but I also had to establish my credibility with people outside my agency. That when I spoke for the governor or the secretary, I knew what I was talking about. And for example, here it says, or why new signs and paint can go a long way.

In the western part of this of Boston, there was a major highway corridor called route 3 that was very congested. The people out there were yelling, screaming all the time about, why isnt the state widening the road? Why arent they put in commuter? Why arent they spending hundreds of millions of dollars to help us reduce our congestion, et cetera? And the reason was we didnt have money to do everything. And so the governor and the secretary and myself and several of us went out there, and the governor stood up and said, yes, we. We're aware of your problems. We're aware of your issues. And the secretary stood up and said, oh yes, were going to do a good job. And he said well now Dr. Meyer is going to stand up and tell us what were going to do.

Now I have been told by the governor and the secretary that what were going to do is whats called a core study. In other words were going to study it. And eventually after the study, which would be probably 2 or 3 years, we may come to a point us in our heres what we should do in terms of investment.

So I stood up and I said were going to conduct a corridor study. Well, everybody, when I was done, they all stood up to, you're just going to study it. You're not going to do anything. This is a plot to avoid the issue.

And it really wasn't, but I could understand where they were coming from. Anyway, it was not the best result of that meeting, but I went back to the agency and I called up the deputy chief engineer for maintenance. The person who put the paint down and the signs and signals up and everything else. Now, he didnt report to me. He did not report to me, okay? And I said his name was. I can't remember. His name was Joe. I want new payment markings on the road and new signs, traffic signs put up in the route 3 corridor out west. And he looked at me and said, I don't answer to you, and why would we do that? Because they are. They're not. Now is not time when they're supposed to be replaced. And I said, Joe, I was just with the governor, and I was like, oh, absolutely. Well do this. And so within 2 or 3 weeks, we had brand new signs and new payment markings on road. And you wouldnt believe the reaction of the newspapers that, oh my gosh, the state follows through with the promise to make some improvements. Now, payment markings and signs arent necessarily huge improvements, but the fact is that we followed through with something.

Gave us an early victory. In terms of establishing our credibility with that group. So, as I said, new signs of paint can go a long way externally. Now, the big issue was to solve these expressly. For those of you who dont know your geography, thats the state of Massachusetts. That area in orange is the Boston metropolitan area. And the southeast expressway is where that arrow is pointed to. It was the most important freeway in Massachusetts. It had a very large volume on it. It was decided that over a twoyear period. We had to replace the bridge decks. And so if we were going to replace the bridge decks, why dont we just redo the road? It was going to be incredibly disruptive. And thats when I said that. The governor pointed to the secretary, who pointed to the commissioner, then pointed to me and said, youre responsible for making sure this isnt a disaster. So this is another one of these victories external to the agency that become important. 1St of all, perception is ninety nine point nine percent of the bell, especially with the media.

I was out there over and over again prior to the construction, saying, this is gonna be terrible. Really need. We have to use transit use resulted groups, flex time, you name it. I was out there trying to basically say, this is going to be a real serious problem. Trying to establish the perception that in fact it was going to be a problem, which it was, and that people needed to respond to it. Especially with the media loves the point to disasters, the controversies, et cetera. And so it became very important for us to basically convey through the media, and at that point in time, it was TV and newspapers, there was no internet, that this was a necessary project.

Now here is another example of how perception is 99.9999% of the battle. It turns out most of you are probably not pavement engineers. Probably not a pavement engineer. It turns out though, that whats on top of the road is could look very nice, but was underneath the road called. The foundation could be in real bad shape. Especially with bridges. You have bridges, people drive over bridges, says, well that looks nice, but if you look underneath, there could be rusted joints, there could be all sorts of things underneath. So I called them, I called up the deputy chief for maintenance again. And I said, what I want you to do is go out at this location, this bridge, and underneath the bridge deck, put up nets and put plywood up. Just put plywood up and put nets under the plywood. Why are we doing that? So dont ask, just do it. He said, well, why? Just do it. Okay, fine. And then when we were preparing the media for what was going to happen, we put them all in a bus that we drove up and down the corner, and we happened to stop at underneath this bridge. And of course, being the astute people that they are, the reporter looked up as simple, what is that? Plywood. And what is that net? Well, thats whats holding the bridge up. And you should have heard the headlines the next day. All the state must get this world repaired as quickly as possible. Up. And that point in time was controversial. Not after that. And so here we have the commissioner of public works pointing to Apollo. Not in the corridor, just point in some place where there was a pothole, saying this is the reason why we have to reconstruct the freeway. And this is me, if you'll notice, it was I was a quote from me.

Since for the 1st2 or 3 weeks, expect chaos. After that, we hope will adapt. We spent a lot of time in the newspapers. Again, there was no internet at the time. And I was in front of the television cameras a lot. And one of the things that I Learned very quickly is that they could interview you for 15 or 20 minutes, but all they want is 30 seconds for their TV spot. And they will sometimes clip out exactly what they want you to say.

But you didnt say Meyer says its going to be Armageddon. Its going to be a disaster unless we do the following things. And the quote is Myers says its going to be Armageddon. Its going to be exact, period. Nothing about what I said had to happen.

So I often got called into the secretary's office saying, why did you say that? I said, I didn't say that, I said this. And they took it out of context, which they do now.

Into the fishbowl at the bottom. This basically means this is an analogy of when you're in the government, there are a lot of people watching you from outside. So you're like a goldfish and a fishbowl swimming around. And everyone's there looking at you as you swim around. And thats very true when in fact, youre in a public environment trying to do something that a lot of people dont necessarily want you to do. Believe it or not, thats me back when I was 30 one. But I have obviously aged over time. But the point here was that I was, in fact in the news a lot. Trying to convey to people what was going to happen and what they could do to avoid it.

You want credit? Laugh out loud. I took this job from being a professor at mit. When youre a professor, you write papers. You put your name on the papers, you get credit for it. You give a talk on that paper, you get credit for it. And so I wrote the mitigation plan for this reconstruction project. I put my name on it and went up to the secretaries office. He loved it. Took my name off, put his name on it, and went to the governor's office. He took the secretary's name off and put his name on it. So it became the governor's plan. I wrote it. I wrote a hundred percent of it. But i didn't get credit for it. Except people knew who actually did it. But in the public, it was the governor's plan. Wasn't my plan. So I had to learn very quickly that when in a public environment in particular, and I suspect this is true in any government agency around the world, that the person on the top, if its good, will want the credit. If its bad, you get it. A crisis is a good thing. A lot of people think, oh, my gosh, a crisis is terrible. Things could happen, people could get hurt, unfortunately, et cetera.

Well, in this case, the southeast expressway project was considered a crisis. And as someone on the inside who was responsible for putting in place a plan to minimize disruption, I love the crisis. I could get things done. I cut through red tape. I was. The bureaucracy just fell over trying to get things done that I wanted to get done. So I used the crisis. Excuse me? I used the crisis to get things implemented that ordinarily I would not have been able to do. And we implemented a very comprehensive program. And it was the crisis that, in fact, caused a lot of barriers to fall down.

Flexibility. Okay. Don't forget the rats. What do I mean by this? As part of the project, we had to enter into a contract with the construction contract, the one that was going to be building the freeway. And we thought we had done everything we could possibly think of. We had put in the contract. Dont do this, don't do that, can't do this. Everything.

Well, the project started one day and one of my staff members walked into my office and said, well weve got a real problem in the expressway construction. Well, whats that? What do you mean?

Rats. Well, it turns out that if you know how buildings and bridges are constructed, you have pile drivers that pound pilings into the ground to the active foundation. Well, that actually causes migration. And it turns out in this part of the city, there were a lot of rat nests near the quarter. That when they felt the vibration, they left their nests and went flying into the neighborhoods. And, of course, neighborhoods. On the uproar about rats. Now investing in their neighborhood, luckily.

And this is the flexibility part. I had put in the contract words that basically said, you should visit. And then the flexible phrase, and anything else, as directed by the director as appropriate. And that was my flexibility. And called up the contractors, that, I don't care how you do it, go out and get those rats, and I don't care what you do with them, get rid of them. And they did.

Because in the contract, I had put in this flexibility. That, no matter if something happens that im not aware of, where something that occurs, that we need to respond as we think of. I need to have the flexibility in the contract to be able to get you to do it. And we did.

Now, this again, may be different around the world, but in the United States, at least in the public sector, there are requirements. They have public involvement or public engagement. People have to be given the opportunity to understand what it is youre doing, why youre doing it, and how it will impact them. And so this was a very transparent, swimming in the goldfish bowl type of process. Or what are those black snakelike things on my desk?

Okay, well, one of the things that we wanted to do in the corridor is we wanted to know how many cars would stay away from the freeway and go on the major roads that parallel the freeway. Well, back then again, we didnt have any advanced technologies that we had today. We basically, we had hoses and wires, ropes that go across the road, and they would indicate, in fact, that there was a car going across that. From the pressure or the magnetic issues, I dont remember which one. And of course, what would happen is the neighborhood did not like us. They did not want this. They did not want cars in their neighborhood, going through their neighborhood. So every night they would go and cut up those black hoses, and next morning they would be on my desk sending me a message that they did not like the fact that there were people going through their neighborhoods. And somehow these car counting hoses became the symbol of what we had done to them. And even though our numbers showed that had not happened, that there was not a significant increase in traffic on the side roads. But I didn't order more post put down. And next day they come back cut up. So its another message in terms of public enrollment. So lets get back to the agency.

That was again, that form was the southeast expressway example of getting victories, et cetera. One of the things in the technical agency. And I dont care if youre in transportation or water resources, or, I suspect even a computer engineering company, where the case is, agencies usually establish what are called standard operating procedures. That means, here is how you will do it. Engineers love standard operating procedures, the design manuals. You go, heres the manual, heres. This is how we do it. 10Ft shoulders, 12ft lanes, a greater elevation, no greater than a certain amount. So if you really want to understand how a transportation department does, or for that matter, many other agencies, find out what the design guides are, find out what the standard operating procedures are.

And the caught up above is a paraphrase of admiral Farragut, who was an admiral during the civil war, who. The union navy was attacking mobile, Alabama, and they had mines, they called them torpedoes. They had mines in the water. And the union navy was hesitant to go into the mobile harbor because of all these torpedoes or mines. And animal fergus said, damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead. Its a very famous saying. I have taken torpedoes out and put in sops. But basically, yes, those are there. But figure out a way, if necessary, to add more flexibility to the sops to do what you may have to do. And what I did is that the secretary, before I left to come down to Georgia, he asked me to rewrite the design manual for the highway department, basically. And I rewrote the design manual. And where it set for width of plane, I put an asterisk that said depends. It depends on engineering judgment. Well, you would have thought that I declared world war iii. The engineers did not like that. They wanted to say, you will put in 12ft lanes, so that they could point to it and justify it based as an design mail. But I said, look, there has to be some adaptations of flexibility. What you do in downtown Boston is not the same what you could do out in a rural part of the state. It cant be. The context is completely different. And so the standard argument procedures are very important to understand. And basically try to understand and figure out a way of using them to budget as you want to do.

After I left Massachusetts, I was asked to attend a conference and give a talk at an environmental conference. And said, what did I learn as 5 years as being in charge of environmental analysis? And I came up with what I call the design approach. I said, prior to my being there, the standard operating procedures was, you define the problem, congestion, safety, whatever it is, you subdivide that problem into different parts. Pavement, foundation, bridges, culverts, you name it. You design the individual parts, you put it all together and you say, oh, we have an environmental problem we have to mitigate. I said instead we should begin with the environmental context, try to figure out how to define the problem within that environment. Then do a systems design together so its not undone individually, and then manage the facility after its there to reduce environmental problems.

Now this was a shocker to the people at the time, it turns out, not because of me, ive been very clear and that wasnt because of me, but it turns out several states after this basically adopted. This was the beginning of what we call context sensitive design or context sensitive solutions, where you start with the context 1st. And so this was exactly one of the lessons of observations I had made. A csd context sensitive design that evolved into context sensitive solutions.

Money. Whats 3.3 billion dollars among friends? Especially when it turns out to be 15 billion. For those of you familiar with Boston, theres a major freeway that goes right through downtown Boston. Its called the central artery. At the time it was elevated, it was ugly and the secretary wanted to put it. Put it underground. And so the entire agency was focused on that particular project. The estimate was 3.3 billion at the time. It ended up by the time the project was done, it was 15 billion dollars. Which is a pretty big price increase.

But remember I said that I represented Massachusetts around the country. I was often bombarded by other states saying, how dare you take this amount of money from the highway trust fund, which is where the money came from. And so I ended up having to defend Massachusetts even though I had nothing to do with this project. The secretary said, Mike, you take care of the rest of the state. He will focus on that project, because that's what he wanted to do. And so I took care of the rest of the day.

I had nothing to do this, but I found myself basically trying to defend it in national forums, when, in fact, people would say, thats unfair. The Massachusetts to get all that money. One of my responsibilities is was to do strategic planning. And by strategic, I dont mean longrange planning long term, but what was then called corporate planning. How do you plan strategically for the agency so that the agency, in fact, will be effective over the next several years? And remember I said at the very beginning the average age was 58. Well, within several years, a large number of those engineers were going to retire. That was a huge threat. And so I established a process with all the top managers of the agency, which we call strategic planning. And we basically went through a formal process, said, where are we now? Where do we want to be? What are the barriers that are causing us not to get there? And what do we have to do to overcome those barriers to get to where we want to go? So this took some time. And this was strategic plan? Well, the head of my agency, not the secretary, but the head of my agency called me into his office one day. He says, im not doing this. I dont. Im not going to be here in 5 years. All im concerned about is if a truck overturns on the freeway tomorrow, and what that disaster is going to be. And I just. He kind of removed himself from a strategic perspective of this, which caused the problem. Because if the leader of the agency is not involved, then youve got a problem. But given what I Learned from that is that an engineeringoriented agency often is more worried about today and tomorrow than it is 10,1520 years from now. Not true in planning, which is where youre looking for in the future. But if you have a civil engineer who is responsible for managing and running the system, today, theyre really worried about the disasters. Today and tomorrow theyre not worried about. And I. So I had to figure out how to overcome that issue, and I did. I went to the secretary and he gave me. I was now solely responsible for streets, teaching, planning for the agency. And whatever I came up with, the agency was gonna implement. And there would be no questions asked.

I wrote a textbook many years ago. Youve read at least one chapter of it, I believe. And that book was our transportation planning. And most transportation planning textbooks, not many, but they all adopt a rational perspective. You start with your goals, objectives. You then define what your performance measures are. You then do your analysis. So there's a very rational process. But in politics, sometimes political decisions are made before the planning is done. For example, there was in the same freeway quarter, the southeast expressway quarter. The people down there wanted to extend the commuter rail line. Sell these, build onto it. So go farther into the hinterland, so to Spain. That was their solution.

The governor announced, yep, thats what were going to do. Were going to extend the commuter rail line. He called me up and said, Mike, were going to extend the community. To realize the governor, you cant say that. And there was an applause. He said, Mike, you do realize im the governor? I said, yes, I know youre the governor. And I said, I assume you want to use federal money. Absolutely. Well, we have to go through a planning process, we have to go through an environmental process, and by law you cant make a decision of the outcome before you do the planning, environmental analysis. Don't say that. You could be challenging court if you said well, this is what were going to do.

Now we did everything to basically justify your decision is. And that happened very long time now. It turns out the extension of the community line was in fact the most logical thing to do, because it was the extension of an existing facility. So it made sense. But the textbooks dont put it that way. You do this and then the last thing you do is decisions.

In a political environment. I find that sometimes decisions are made 1st, and then sometimes planning and technical analysis comes afterwards. The politics of the traffic signal. I mentioned that I was responsible for traffic operations. I spent more time in my 5 years dealing with traffic signals and signs than I did with planning. Much to my shop. Because everybody is concerned about traffic congestion and everybody wanted to have a signal at their block to stop so they could walk across the street or to get rid of the signal so they could drive their car. The politics of the traffic signal are incredible and I won't. I don't have time to go into it and. But literally, I would have meetings with a us senator, a us congressman, mayor, got off a large number of people on the other side of the table, and then there was me on this side of the table and representing the state and the senator, and the congressman and the mayor and everybody else. To say, oh, we have to have this traffic signal. And ray said, well, here we go. Standard operating procedure says you only justify a signal if theres a safety issue or if theres a congestion issue, were the cases. I said, and we looked at this location, and in fact, theres no justification for a traffic signal there except for the fact that somebody wants it. We could be held liable if the car gets, someone backs into a car or crashes into a car because they stopped at a traffic signal that was not warranted. We could be sued because we didn't satisfy the requirements.

And if the secretary signs on it, then well, do it. But I am not going to sign off on it. Im the registered professional engineer. I have rules and regulations that I have to follow. And I thought, well, it turns out the governor told the secretary, who told me to do it, and we put a signal in. But it was amazing to me how political simply a traffic signal could become. We live in a democracy in the United States, so there are elected officials everywhere, from the national level all the way down. Sometimes I dealt with a lot of them as part of the southeast expressway project. They werent the smartest of people. They were. Most of them were, but some were not. They were local people that had the. Their constituencies that over and over again. They get elected over and over again. And they would do some things and sometimes say some things that you just say, will, where is that coming from? How could they possibly say that? And one of my frustrations in that role where I had to deal with public officials, was sometimes listening and nodding my head, not saying anything, but nodding my head when they were say, start saying something that was probably not correct. Whatever. But I didnt want to say no in public. I didnt want to say no. I talked to them afterwards. But you just had to stay there and take it.

And sometimes I question how would these people ever get into elected positions internal to my agency? I mentioned the strategic planning exercise. One of the things that the secretary did is hired a management consulting firm to look at how we were structured. They, of course, wanted to justify their money. And so they came in my bureau and said, well, youre the director, you have a deputy director, you have 3 associate directors. That's inefficient. You shouldn't have a deputy director. You should only have. Just think how much money will save by not having that deputy director. And I said no. And they said, what do you mean no? I said no, I'm going to have my deputy director. Why? Because I'm out of the state a lot. I do a lot of national things. He has to be here. I trust him. I chose him because I trusted him to follow what I want to be done. So I cant have 3 people reporting to me. If im in los angeles or seattle or washington dc, I have to have it. And so they agreed because I signed their checks in terms of their consulting checks. But what I was basically doing inside my HC was making sure that my power base, which was the deputy director in the sun, was called. Make sure that there was someone there when I wasn't there, who knew what that was I wanted and how to do it.

Coming close to the end. Institutionalized. What do I mean by that? In 5 years, I was able to make a lot of changes. I changed the design manual. I did a lot of interesting things. But I was a political pointy. When I was going to leave the position, someone was going to take my place. And here she could go in and just absolutely got everything I did if they wanted to. It turns out they tried to, but I'd already. I already put some things in standard ivory procedures in the design manual that already been approved, proved and they couldn't change it. So my recommendation to you is if in fact you would want to do some things that are important and significant, figure out a way to put them within the standard operating procedures of your agency. And institutionalize them so that they will last beyond your tenure in that position. Yes, okay. Finally. I guess. I think its finally at least again in the United States. And because were working on a public arena, an engineer who can actually speak in public is a very hot commodity. That person in a public agency has often sent out to deal with a public.

And a consultant, a consulting company, that person is often one that goes out to deal with the public. And being able to speak in public is a gift and is very valuable. And I often try to encourage engineers that I have in my classes to write well. And everyone had make presentations because I think it's really important that you know how to speak.

And then one of the ways you deal with this is if youre in charge of a meeting or a committee, or task forces. Never say thats dumb or doesnt say well were not going to consider that. I was put in charge of a task force by the secretary to look at a part of a highway that was. That been in controversy for 20 years. We couldnt get. We could not get past the advisory committee that the secretary had established. There were 40 people on the advisory committee. They could not agree on anything. And so he said, youre now chairman of that. I want you to go out, and before you go to Georgia, I want you to come to a consensus, that group come to a consistency of what we should do. Okay? So I showed up and I will say, who are you? I said, well, im the new chair of the committee. Director of transportation planning for the state. And so I said, lets listen. I would never say thats terrible. I would say, no, thats a really good point. And well consider it and well get back to you.

And basically through a period of 3 to 4 months, we were able to finally take a vote at the end. And there was one person whove been there forever. And his claim to fame as he had stopped anything from happening. Anything. And the vote was taken. And the vote was 39 to one in favor of doing what we had proposed to do. And I went up to him afterwards. His name was herb. His name I heard.

I said, im sorry we voted the way we did. I know you didnt like it. I said, thats probably the best thing for the. For the state. And he looked at me and he said, Mike, you are the most dangerous person in Massachusetts. And I said, well, what do you mean by that? He said, because the way you handled this meeting is you could be sticking a knife in somebodys back and turning it. And you could convince them that it really felt good. You said you handled this meeting in a way that everyone felt like their ideas were thought about, were considered. And you were polite, you were respectful. And because of that the vote was 39 one. That was. Thats what makes you dangerous. I didnt think that was dangerous. I thought that was effective. And so how you deal with meetings again, is a very important. And then by the way, meetings inside the agency as well and have time to talk about that. But effective meetings usually start on time and end on time. And we. There are all sorts of lessons Learned there too. But anyway, in summary, I have fun. Absolutely.

In my 5 years I Learned a lot. I became a professor in civil engineering. One of the few professors in civil engineering anywhere in the country that actually been in the government agency for 5 years. So whenever there was an advise national advisory committee or something on transportation. They all. I was all often has to participate because I had both an academic perspective and a government perspective. So I was invited to do many things. I testified to the 7 congressional committees, which very seldom happens, primarily because I had that government experience.

Did I learn a lot? Yes. From what I said today already. I think youve seen that. Did it help my career? Absolutely. As I mentioned, I became known as the professor who had been, quote, in the trenches and government agencies. So I understood what it meant to to be successful. And that's about the environment.

When I do it again, back then, the answer is yes. I mean, I was in a unique situation. I was not married yet. I just had to come married. So I didnt have a large mortgage, I didnt have a family. So I was able. I was able and willing to take risks that I talked about in my presentation. But I Learned a lot, and I think that would cause me to do it again, all over again. 
